.. -*- mode: rst -*-

About
=====

scikits.learn is a python module for machine learning built on top of
scipy.

The project was started in 2007 by David Cournapeu as a Google Summer
of Code project, and since then many volunteers have contributed. See
the AUTHORS file for a complete list of contributors.

It is currently maintained by a team of volunteers.


Download
========

You can download source code and Windows binaries from SourceForge:

http://sourceforge.net/projects/scikit-learn/files/


Dependencies
============

The required dependencies to build the software are python >= 2.5,
NumPy >= 1.1, SciPy, the Boost libraries and a working C++ compiler.

Optional dependencies are scikits.optimization for module
machine.manifold.

To run the tests you will also need nosetests and python-dap
(http://pypi.python.org/pypi/dap/).


Install
=======

This packages uses distutils, which is the default way of installing
python modules. The install command is::

  python setup.py install


Mailing list
============

There's a general and development mailing list, visit
https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/scikit-learn-general to
subscribe to the mailing list.


Development
===========

Code
----

SVN
~~~

To check out the sources from the main repository, which is under
subversion control, run the command::

   svn co http://scikit-learn.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/scikit-learn/trunk scikit-learn

You can also browse the code online at
http://scikit-learn.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/scikit-learn

GIT Mirror
~~~~~~~~~~

There is also an automatically updated git mirror of scikit-learn
available from github (http://github.com/yarikoptic/scikit-learn).  So
you could setup your development using GIT and committing results back
to SVN using ``git svn``.  To get started using git mirror and link it
to original SVN, use::

  git clone --origin=svn git://github.com/yarikoptic/scikit-learn.git scikit-learn
  cd scikit-learn
  git svn init --prefix=svn/ -s https://scikit-learn.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/scikit-learn
  git svn rebase -l -n			         # should be quick
  git config svn.authorsfile .svnauthors

Such setup was inspired by GIT Mirror for NumPy and SciPy projects,
which is well described at
http://projects.scipy.org/numpy/wiki/GitMirror .

If you are not a part of the team and/or have no commit rights to SVN,
but want to share code/documentation changes (bug fixes, enhancements,
etc.), you can either make use of ``git format-patch`` commands to
prepare a bundle of patches to be posted with bugreport (see Bugs), or
simply create your own fork of git repository on github ("Fork" button
in github web UI) and point to corresponding commits within your
bugreport.


Bugs
----

Please submit bugs you might encounter, as well as patches and feature
requests to the tracker located at the address
https://sourceforge.net/apps/trac/scikit-learn/report


Testing
-------

To execute the test suite, run from the project's top directory (you
will need to have nosetest installed)::

    python setup.py test


